JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Our lead tonight
is news that
we hoped we would never have to
report.
Our managing editor, my
co-anchor and dear
friend, Gwen Ifill, died earlier
today after
an almost yearlong battle with
cancer.
She was a supernova in a
profession loaded
with smart and talented people.
So, it's no
surprise that messages of
condolence have
flooded in all afternoon from
across the journalism
and political spectrum.
President Obama said this at the
White House:
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Michelle and I want to offer our
deepest condolences
to Gwen Ifill's family and all
of you, her
colleagues, on her passing.
Gwen was a friend of ours. She
was an extraordinary
journalist. She always kept
faith with the
fundamental responsibilities of
her profession,
asking tough questions, holding
people in
power accountable, and defending
a strong
and free press that makes our
democracy work.
I always appreciated Gwen's
reporting, even
when I was at the receiving end
of one of
her tough and thorough
interviews.
Whether she reported from a
convention floor
or from the field, whether she
sat at the
debate moderator's table or at
the anchor's
desk, she not only informed
today's citizens,
but she also inspired tomorrow's
journalists.
She was an especially powerful
role model
for young women and girls, who
admired her
integrity, her tenacity and her
intellect,
and for whom she blazed a trail
as one-half
of the first all-female anchor
team on network
news.
So, Gwen did her country a great
service.
Michelle and I join her family
and her colleagues
and everybody else who loved her
in remembering
her fondly today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
today at the
White House.
We're devoting most of tonight's
show to Gwen.
And we start with this look at
her remarkable
life.
GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And with those
words each evening,
Americans knew they were in good
hands, Gwen
Ifill's hands.
She was the heart and soul of
PBS' "NewsHour"
and "Washington Week." She was
also beloved,
sister, aunt, godmother many
times over and
friend to legions.
The daughter of a minister, Gwen
graduated
from Simmons College in
Massachusetts, got
her start in journalism at The
Boston Herald-American,
before moving on to The
Baltimore Evening
Sun in 1981, then to The
Washington Post,
followed by several years as a
politics reporter
and White House correspondent
for The New
York Times.
GWEN IFILL: Even marginal
progress could be
affected by investigations in
Little Rock
and in Washington.
JUDY WOODRUFF: She moved to
television and
NBC News in 1994.
GWEN IFILL: They have to find a
way to work
with this president for the next
two years
-- Tom.
TOM BROKAW, NBC News: NBC's Gwen
Ifill on
Capitol Hill tonight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Then, in October
1999, she
came to PBS to host "Washington
Week," the
long-running political
roundtable...
GWEN IFILL: Good evening.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... and to become
senior correspondent
on "The NewsHour With Jim
Lehrer."
JIM LEHRER: And to our new
senior correspondent,
Gwen Ifill, welcome, Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: Thanks, Jim.
Well, for a preview of the
Supreme Court's
1999 term...
How would you prioritize the
needs at the
border right now?
JUDY WOODRUFF: There, she added
to her lengthy
and accomplished body of work.
In 2013, Gwen and I were honored
to assume
the great responsibility, and
joy, of co-anchoring
this program.
Good evening. I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Those are just some of the
stories we're covering
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: On this, the
first night of
the new "PBS NewsHour," we have
a lot of news
for you.
GWEN IFILL: We also have a new
look, but Judy
and I will be bringing you the
news and analysis
you have come to trust.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it was that
trust, her
dedication, that was her stock
in trade. She
was the gold standard in our
business, known
for a fierce allegiance and
loyalty to her
family, friends, and colleagues,
but also
to the facts.
Her range was limitless. Here
are some highlights.
GWEN IFILL: How do we as a
nation cope with
race conflict and our inability
to see each
other?
Let me turn this on its head,
because when
we talk about race in this
country, we always
talk about African-Americans,
people of color.
I want to talk to you about
white people,
OK?
MAN: White people.
GWEN IFILL: Why don't you
mention Donald Trump
by name?
BARACK OBAMA: You know, he seems
to do a good
job mentioning his own name.
(LAUGHTER)
BARACK OBAMA: So, I think I will
let him do
his advertising for him.
GWEN IFILL: Susana Flores, the
owner, is a
legal resident who tried
unsuccessfully to
teach me how to make tortillas.
Susana's sister, Rocina
Sandoval, who works
as a waitress, is not here
legally. She could
easily be deported.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Gwen is in Des
Moines for Iowa's
State Fair.
GWEN IFILL: This weekend, the
political yin
and yang of a crowded field all
descended
on Iowa at once and brought it
into especially
sharp focus.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (I),
Vermont: The American
people are growing extremely
unhappy with
establishment politics, with
establishment
economics, and you know what
else?
GWEN IFILL: What?
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Even with
establishment
media.
GWEN IFILL: No!
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Yeah!
GWEN IFILL: I think every single
conversation
we have had with a Republican in
this booth,
when we asked them about these
issues, they
have always turned it back to
talking about
Hillary Clinton.
And that does seem to be the
most persuasive
argument, David, that
Republicans in this
room have.
Can you see a scenario right now
in which
he would step back from the
border at all
in a way that you can trust?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Well, I think you have asked
exactly the right
question, as you often do, Gwen.
TOM BROKAW: NBC's Gwen Ifill has
our in-depth
report.
GWEN IFILL: Even marginal
progress could be
affected by investigations in
Little Rock
and in Washington involving the
president,
the first lady and their
political supporters.
Fifty years later, though, if
King were able
to stand in that spot and look
out, what is
the legacy of that day that some
people say,
we have a black president,
everything is much
better, and some people say, we
have so much
farther to go?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Gwen raised
questions others
wouldn't or that wouldn't even
occur to them.
Here's one example from the vice
presidential
debate she moderated in 2004.
GWEN IFILL: I want to talk to
you about AIDS,
and not about AIDS in China or
in Africa,
but AIDS right here in this
country, where
black women between the ages of
25 and 44
are 13 times more likely to die
of the disease
than their counterparts.
What should the government's
role be in helping
to end the growth of this
epidemic?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Four years later,
she sat down
with another set of candidates.
GWEN IFILL: Welcome to the first
and the only
2008 vice presidential debate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Throughout that
2008 campaign,
Gwen wasn't only reporting for
the "NewsHour"
and "Washington Week"; she was
writing about
that moment in history.
As the nation's first
African-American president
was elected, she marked it with
"The Breakthrough,"
the story of a new generation of
black politicians.
But it wasn't just politics that
moved her.
GWEN IFILL: This is fun. Now,
this is the
way I always wanted to do the
"NewsHour."
Have a little fun.
HARRY BELAFONTE,
Singer/Actor/Civil Rights
Activist: I woke up one day and
the whole
world was singing "Banana Boat."
And I didn't
really understand how powerful I
was until
I stood before an audience of
50,000 Japanese
trying to sing Day-O.
(LAUGHTER)
HARRY BELAFONTE: And I was like,
yes, I have
arrived.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Well, I would say
you have managed
over the years to sing your
song.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Gwen's spirit,
nourished by
her connection to her church,
was on full
display when she sat down with
Aretha Franklin
just one year ago tomorrow.
GWEN IFILL: So, is part of you,
you know,
always going to be Reverend C.L.
Franklin's
daughter?
ARETHA FRANKLIN, Musician:
Absolutely.
GWEN IFILL: I'm a preacher's
kid, too, so
I...
ARETHA FRANKLIN: I knew you --
P.K., OK.
GWEN IFILL: But I -- I am a P.K.
But I don't
sing quite like you.
ARETHA FRANKLIN: Oh, well, we
don't all sing.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: We have other gifts.
ARETHA FRANKLIN: Yes, you have
other gifts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Indeed, she did.
One of her last stories was
about the new
National Museum of African
American History
and culture.
GWEN IFILL: This is an amazing
place, chockful
of the expected and the
unexpected.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Recently, Gwen
talked about
her love for the "NewsHour" and
what it means
in today's world:
GWEN IFILL: We occupy a role
that we know
they appreciate. They tell us
this.
And it's not too much to tell
them back how
much we love them back. There is
-- the world
is split into a million
different little ways
of consuming your information.
A lot of young people say, I get
my profession
from "The Daily Show." Or a lot
of young people
say, I only read what I see on
my phone browser.
But we have a dedicated,
committed audience
who want to know more, who want
us to dig
a little deeper on their behalf.
And so, if
they weren't there, if they
weren't supporting
the work we do, we couldn't
exist.
And I think it's kind of vital
to democracy
that we do exist.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Gwen touched
so many lives.
And there has been a tremendous
outpouring
of remembrances today.
Attorney General Loretta Lynch
had this to
say.
LORETTA LYNCH, U.S. Attorney
General: Gwen
Ifill was a pioneering figure in
American
journalism who quite literally
changed the
face of the evening news.
She met discrimination and
bigotry with talent
and focus, rising to become one
of the most
prominent journalists of her
generation. She
pursued her reporting with
grace, intelligence
and integrity, earning her the
trust of countless
Americans who counted on her to
present the
facts of the story without slant
or spin.
She asked tough questions and
told hard truths,
but she always did so in a way
that elevated,
rather than coarsened, our
national discourse.
Our country is a better place
because of her
commitment to the truth, and she
will be sorely
missed, both on the air and off.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're joined now
by some who
knew Gwen well, Charlayne
Hunter-Gault, a
colleague and friend of Gwen's
and a longtime
member of our "NewsHour" family,
John Dickerson
of CBS News, also a regular
panelist and occasional
host for "Washington Week,"
Kevin Merida,
a longtime colleague and now
with the Web
site ESPN's Undefeated, and Amy
Walter, also
of our "NewsHour" and
"Washington Week" families.
She's with The Cook Political
Report.
This is a tough night for all of
us. I know
you each are -- have so much you
want to say
about Gwen.
I'm going to start with you,
Kevin Merida,
because I think you have known
Gwen the longest
in this group. Tell us about
meeting her.
KEVIN MERIDA, ®MD-BO /ESPN: Well,
it was
incredible.
I was a -- I was editor of a
black publication
at Boston University, a black
student newspaper.
And we did a piece on Gwen,
because here she
was, this hot shot journalist
right out of
college who got hired by The
Boston Herald-American.
And for many young black
journalists or aspiring
black journalists, we didn't
know many people
like Gwen. And so she felt a
little bit like
a unicorn then. And so we became
friends after
that. But that was my first
introduction to
her.
She was a wonderful friend,
obviously, and
inspired many of us throughout
our careers.
HARI SREENIVASAN: John
Dickerson, you met
Gwen on the campaign trail
covering politics,
and then you became friends.
JOHN DICKERSON, CBS News: Yes.
I mean, all I have been thinking
about today
is her smile.
(LAUGHTER)
JOHN DICKERSON: You could read
by the light
of Gwen's smile.
(LAUGHTER)
JOHN DICKERSON: And it felt sort
of like it
greeted you before she did.
And she was a tough, great
journalist. When
we were in the company of other
journalists,
her question was always the one
that just
kind of cut through the fog and
sometimes
was a little impolitic.
But the thing I will remember
first is just
what a great and warm person she
was and how,
whatever mood you were in before
you were
with Gwen, you left it with joy
in your heart.
And, in Washington, there is not
a lot of
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's for sure.
Charlayne Hunter-Gault, you were
obviously
a regular right here on the
"NewsHour" for
many, many years. And you have
known Gwen
for a long time.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: I have
known Gwen
for a long time, but I had left
to go to Africa
to live and work by the time
Gwen got to the
"NewsHour."
And what's so amazing is that,
you know, she's
of a generation younger than
mine, but I,
as an older-generation
journalist, used to
look back on Gwen for
inspiration, because,
as everybody has just said, I
mean, she knew
how to cut through the
you-know-what.
And yet she maintained such an
air of professionalism.
She didn't put people off. She
welcomed them
into her space. But, at the same
time, when
she got to the "NewsHour," she
was already
doing what we believed in, and
that was to
present news that could be used
by people,
so that, if they got good
information, they
would make the right decisions
about how to
live as a good citizen in a
democratic nation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Amy Walter,
you have done
so many of these Politics
Mondays just in
this most recent cycle, but you
have known
her for much longer.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What is it
about her political
acumen, her skill that all of
these folks
are talking about, the ability
to cut through
the...
AMY WALTER: I'm so glad that you
asked that,
because that's what I was trying
to remember,
too.
It's, honestly, very hard
sitting at this
desk and not having her across
from me. Her
love for politics and her love
for the process
of it is what I have always
admired about
her. She wanted to do the stuff
that a lot
of journalists didn't want to
get to, right,
because it's a lot easier
staying on the surface.
It's a lot easier to go for the
shiny objects.
And she wanted to really get
into it, what
does it mean, how did we get
here, which is
why it was such an honor for me
to work with
her and work with this show, so
that, every
time I got on, I felt better and
smarter for
that.
And you can see, too, with
everybody who is
talking here, she created a
family around
her of all of these people. And
she -- I felt
like we were a little menagerie,
that she
put together all these
incredible people and
took care of all of them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kevin Merida, you
talked about
meeting Gwen early on and what a
-- I think
you said unicorn, how rare it
was to see an
African-American journalist
succeeding as
early as she did.
She told me the story -- and I
assume she
told you -- about first time at
the Boston
newspaper, what happened to her.
Do you remember
that story?
KEVIN MERIDA: You know, I
remember there was
some -- I don't remember the
specifics.
But she was in Boston. We were
both in Boston
at the same time. It was a
really racially
tense city then. I had been an
intern at The
Boston Globe. And anybody who
worked at Boston
newspapers back in that day, and
you were
African-American, many times,
you felt like
you were kind of under this
racial -- almost
racial terror sometimes.
And it was really difficult to
do the job.
The fact that she was able to be
in the newsroom,
reporting in Boston at that
time, was extraordinary,
in and of itself.
And I think she was always one
that, in each
level of her career, there were
never obstacles
that she was going to allow to
block her.
And that kind of professionalism
and the ability
to wear success well was awfully
inspiring,
as we both watched each
generation, you know,
new, young journalists come up
and look toward
her for that model.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Charlayne?
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Judy,
yes, I remember
what the incident was, because I
was speaking
at one of the many awards
ceremonies Gwen
was being honored.
And I looked it up. And a
co-worker had written
to her, "N-word, go home."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right. Right.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And she
had to survive
that and prosper and not pay a
lot of attention
to it.
At the same time, let me very
quickly say
that, while you and Gwen were
noted for becoming
the first two women to anchor a
news program,
you know, Gwen identified as a
woman, she
identified as an
African-American, and she
identified as a human being.
So, she brought all of those
things to bear
in becoming one of the many
consciences of
the news business and the
"NewsHour."
I mean, she championed my series
Race Matters
looking at solutions to racism.
She used to
send me little notes encouraging
me. So, she
could be all of those things and
still reach
out in a universal way to
people, regardless
of race, creed, color, or
national origin.
HARI SREENIVASAN: John
Dickerson, she had
a reputation, as you point out,
to be tough
on both -- in the field, as well
as debates
that she's moderator. Even the
president pointed
out that she was tough, but she
was fair.
JOHN DICKERSON: Yes, that was
her reputation.
And, you know, even with
journalists, she
-- you know, there is a thing
that happens
sometimes when journalists get
together and
everybody kind of gallops along,
sort of saying
the same -- believing in the
same thing.
And Gwen often kind of would
say, now, wait
a minute. And, sometimes, it was
kind of pointed.
And that was because she was
always questioning
what was going on.
And when you prepare for
"Washington Week,"
in the conversation before the
show, you could
always expect that, whatever
fancy thing you
had polished up and thought was
so brilliant,
that she would, you know,
puncture it in -- not
in a mean way.
(LAUGHTER)
JOHN DICKERSON: But she wasn't
going to let
you just get by with something
that sounded
good and maybe had a couple of
clever phrases
in it.
On the other hand, if you could
get her to
laugh and hear her laugh, that
was a special
joy. It wasn't a chuckle. It was
a laugh to
be remembered and to fill up an
entire room.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And with an
office right next
to hers, John, that is what I
guarantee you
I am going to miss the most.
Amy Walter, but talk about that.
I mean, you
have talked about how much she
loved politics
and she wasn't satisfied with
the surface.
I mean, but she was always on a
quest to get
more and -- but to do it in a
way that wasn't
so...
AMY WALTER: And to do it -- that
was joyful.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes. Yes.
AMY WALTER: And that, I think --
sometimes,
we, especially in the political
press, get
so cynical about the same
candidates and the
same promises and the same
election year after
year.
But she always had a -- just a
joy in covering
it, a responsibility in covering
it, but she
also believed that we could make
it better,
right? We could be smarter about
this, and
that we didn't just have to live
with whatever
was put on the table by others.
And, you know, going on John's
point, too,
I mean, she didn't suffer fools
at all, no
matter...
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: No, she did not.
She did not.
AMY WALTER: No matter who you
were, you have
been caught in the Gwen look
of...
JUDY WOODRUFF: All of us -- all
of us have
experienced this.
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: Have gotten the Gwen
look.
But it's because she truly
believed in the
process itself that she could
cover it so
well. You don't have to believe
that everything
is going to work out perfectly
in covering
politics, but you have to
believe that the
process is important. And she
did.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Kevin Merida,
one of the
things that you pointed out
earlier, for young
journalists of color who were
coming up at
the time, and even today, she
has been a role
model throughout her
professional life.
KEVIN MERIDA: You know, she
always made time
for people. She was never too
big. You know,
achievement never got away from
her.
And she understood what people
went through.
And she was very helpful in
letting other
young journalists know her
story. And she
brought people together. I mean,
many of the
panelists know that she had a
really well-received
open house every New Year's Day.
And I watched over the years how
that open
house got bigger and bigger, and
because she
let more and more people into
the circle because
she thought it was also
important to bring
people together. And that was
one of the ways,
among many others, that she did
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Charlayne
Hunter-Gault, talk
a little bit about what she
meant to journalists
of color, to people of color.
I would be with her walking down
the street
or in a restaurant or at an
airport. And I
would see the immediate
connection that she
had with all people, but there
was -- of course,
because she had fans across all
the spectrums.
But there was a connection for
her in the
African-American community that
was really
-- it was really remarkable.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Well,
absolutely.
And I remember, when I spoke at
the National
Press Club when she was honored
there with
their highest award, I talked
about how she
reminded me a little bit of
Viola Davis, because,
when she went through, there
weren't a whole
lot of women even then, when she
began to
achieve national recognition and
status.
And she would look across that
line, like
Viola Davis said, and reach out
to bring others
in. So, she inspired those she
met. But she
also inspired those just by her
appearance
and by her competence and her
extraordinary
capacity to do all the things
that you have
heard all of her colleagues, old
and new,
talk about.
The other thing about Gwen was,
they say that
she could give you a look. And
that was true.
(LAUGHTER)
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But she
was not full
of herself.
JUDY WOODRUFF: No.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: I mean,
we -- the
last time -- and I'm so glad I
had this moment
with her on Martha's Vineyard
this past summer,
with Michele Norris, the NPR
correspondent.
The three of us were at dinner.
And she just
sat back and let us yammer and
talk and chat.
And we would say something, and
she would
say, "Oh, I didn't know that."
And she would
pick up a pen and start writing
it down to
remind herself to look at that.
And we were talking about
something else,
and she went right on her phone
and said:
"No, that's not right. It was
such and such
and such a thing."
But she was humble, even as she
presented
this very strong and powerful
person. So,
I think that what young
African-American people
saw in her was what they could
be. And it
was a wonderful. And I could see
what I could
be, even being older than she.
(LAUGHTER)
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, I'm
just saying
that she appealed to all
generations in the
most wonderful way.
HARI SREENIVASAN: John
Dickerson, she also
seemed to be a journalist that
was willing
to continue learning.
I mean, she didn't take to
Twitter quickly,
but, once she got in, she was
in, and the
world knew about it.
(LAUGHTER)
JOHN DICKERSON: Well, she had to
be somewhere
to tell everybody about
"Hamilton" and every
song that she was listening to.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: I was waiting for
somebody
to bring that up.
(LAUGHTER)
JOHN DICKERSON: Well, I felt as
though I had
to do it for Gwen. Talk about a
woman who
didn't throw away her shot.
She was an enthusiast, you know?
She was an
enthusiast about Twitter,
although skeptical
at first, you know, because --
in part because
I think she probably thought it
was just a
place for people to just kind of
toss off
opinions that might not be
considered.
But then, when she took to it
with her normal
enthusiasm -- and that
enthusiasm, as we said,
often was in the form of either
glory to "Hamilton"
or lyrics from it -- it was just
a perfect
venue for her enthusiasm to come
through.
And that's what I think about
all today, was
just her enthusiasm in all of
its different
forms. And, certainly, in the
new world of
social media, it was there, too.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kevin Merida, I
want to come
back to you on, you know, we --
all of us
lived through journalism
changing rapidly.
Twitter is a part of that.
How did you see Gwen adapting as
journalism
changed right in front of all
our eyes?
KEVIN MERIDA: Well, she grasped
it like she
did everything. It was a
challenge and something
interesting for her.
And I would see, sometimes, I
would tweet
something, and then she would
come back with
an even pithier reply, you know?
One of the things that -- I
remember we were
talking about debates -- and she
certainly
did the vice presidential
debates and the
Democratic primary debate. But I
was an advocate
for her that she should have
been in one of
the presidential general
election debates
as a moderator.
And I remember writing that, you
know, early
on. And she sent, "I love you,
Kevin Merida,"
you know?
(LAUGHTER)
KEVIN MERIDA: And it was just a
little funny,
you know, rejoinder.
But I think that she was so
accomplished and
so well-regarded by so many
other people,
but, for her, she always wanted
to keep learning
and getting better.
And, as Charlayne said and
others, she was
willing to learn from others.
She just soaked
up -- the passion in her for
knowledge was
just amazing.
AMY WALTER: And she was that
rare competitor
in -- at least in Washington,
that wasn't
moving ahead by putting somebody
else down.
KEVIN MERIDA: That's right.
AMY WALTER: If she was going to
get the moderator
job, if she was going to get the
big interview,
she was going to get it because
of the work
that she did, not because she
made somebody
else feel bad or pushed them
down in any way.
And that, especially in this
town, is a remarkable
-- first of all, it's been a
remarkable gift
for so many of us, but it's not
something
that you see very often.
KEVIN MERIDA: So incredibly
classy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I would just say,
in our final
minute with you and Amy Walter
and John Dickerson,
I know Gwen really hated, when I
talked to
her, missing covering the end of
this amazing,
one-of-a-kind presidential
campaign. That
was hard for her to miss it.
AMY WALTER: To not be -- to not
spend an election
night -- I have spent a lot of
election nights
with Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John?
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Judy,
can I just -- can
I just say one final thing?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fifteen seconds.
Sure.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And I
hope -- I hope
I don't cry.
But I saw her on the air one
night, and she
looked so amazing. And, at 10:00
at night,
I couldn't help but write to
her. And that's
when she wrote me back and told
me how -- what
she had been going through.
And I think that's another thing
that we should
absolutely think so highly of
her, because
she worked through all of her
illness without
letting on to anyone about what
was going
on.
The "NewsHour" would say, she's
away, and
everybody thought she was away
working. And
she was suffering mightily. And
she bore it
with such grace.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Thank you,
Charlayne.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you,
Absolutely, she was a pillar of
strength for
everybody out there and for all
of us here
at the "NewsHour."
Charlayne Hunter-Gault, Kevin
Merida, John
Dickerson, Amy Walter right
here, we thank
you all.
KEVIN MERIDA: Thank you.
AMY WALTER: Thank you, Judy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now more
remembrances of
Gwen from Rick Berke. He's
executive editor
at STAT News, and worked with
Gwen at The
Baltimore Evening Sun in the
1980s. Pete Williams,
he is justice correspondent for
NBC News,
where Gwen and he used to cover
Congress and
politics. Karen Tumulty is
national political
correspondent for The Washington
Post. She
and Gwen covered the Jesse
Jackson presidential
campaign together in 1988.
Reverend William Lamar IV is
pastor of the
Metropolitan African Methodist
Episcopal Church
in Washington. He has known the
Ifill family
going back decades. And Yamiche
Alcindor of
The New York Times, Gwen was a
mentor to her.
Pastor Lamar, I want to start
with you. You
knew Gwen in a way that none of
us at the
table did. Besides the church
every weekend,
coming up through the church,
the Ifill name
meant something.
REV. WILLIAM LAMAR IV, Pastor,
Metropolitan
African Methodist Episcopal
Church: Indeed.
Gwen's father was the
secretary-general of
our denomination. So, all
official denominational
literature and statistical
reports carried
his name.
So, I don't remember a time not
seeing or
knowing the Ifill name. And as I
came through
the ranks of ordained ministry,
her brother,
Presiding Elder Earle Ifill of
the Atlanta
North-Georgia annual conference,
was a tremendous
voice and leader in our
denomination.
So, when I had the privilege of
pastoring
her, I knew her pedigree and
knew her ancestry.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And she was a
woman of deep
faith.
REV. WILLIAM LAMAR IV: Oh, she
was there every
week. She was generous. She was
loving. She
was accessible. She was a
mentor. And little
girls could come to her and hug
her, and she
would share and she would
encourage. She was
a great gift to our community.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Rick Berke, you
were -- as
we just said, you knew Gwen
going back to
the 1980s as a young reporter.
Tell us a little
bit about that.
RICHARD BERKE, Executive Editor,
STAT: Gwen
and I covered City Hall together
35 years
ago at The Baltimore Evening
Sun. Then, years
later, we covered the White
House together
at The New York Times.
So, we have covered a lot of
politicians together.
And she had them quaking in
their boots.
(LAUGHTER)
RICHARD BERKE: I mean, she would
look at them,
and they would be intimidated,
from mayors
to presidents.
But it was because she was
whip-smart, she
knew what to ask, and she was
relentless.
But she would always come back
with her big
smile that would just melt
everyone. So, she
was tough, but she was
accessible. And she
always knew what she was talking
about. She
would be able to synthesize the
news in a
way no one else I have ever seen
was able
to.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Pete Williams,
what about
your time at NBC News?
PETE WILLIAMS, NBC News: I think
you also
have to say, not only was she a
great person
of faith, but she loved to sing.
Right?
(LAUGHTER)
PETE WILLIAMS: She was a great
singer at church
and everything else.
I was at NBC when she came
there. Those of
us in television would say it's
very difficult,
what we do, but she made it look
very easy.
She made the transition very
quickly from
print journalism to television.
And, today, I went back and
looked at one
of her first appearances on NBC
in 1994. And
it takes a while to get sort of
the odd little
things, the way we put stories
together, but
she had that spark, that smile.
There was
a lot more hair then.
(LAUGHTER)
PETE WILLIAMS: A lot of us had
more hair...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: A lot of us did.
PETE WILLIAMS: But that spark
that drove "Washington
Week," that made politics
interesting, but
fun, you wanted to pay attention
to, because
you felt you would learn
something in a pleasant
way. And she had that even then.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Karen Tumulty, as
Hari said,
you knew Gwen even before Pete
did. You covered
the Jesse Jackson campaign in
1988.
KAREN TUMULTY, The Washington
Post: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What was that
like? You were
two women covering from
different news organizations.
KAREN TUMULTY: And months on end
trapped in
airplanes and buses.
(LAUGHTER)
KAREN TUMULTY: It's
extraordinary -- and I
think Rick would agree -- that,
even in those
-- 30 years ago, there was a
presence to Gwen
that you would very much
recognize in Gwen
today. She was grounded. She
understood that
she was there looking for the
facts and looking
for the truth.
And I do think, though, when she
did make
that transition to television,
one of the
reasons that she was so
successful at it was
that I just always felt like her
honesty just
came right through that lens.
PETE WILLIAMS: I think a lot of
journalists
look for answers about
themselves, but I think
Gwen knew who she was. And that
is something
that always came through and was
a -- I am
from Wyoming.
And I was at a hardware store in
Jackson,
Wyoming, a couple of summers
ago, and the
man who checked me out said,
"Boy, you must
really be special that Gwen
Ifill would have
you on."
(LAUGHTER)
PETE WILLIAMS: And I told her --
I said, "You
are big at Ace Hardware in
Jackson, Wyoming."
And, of course, that was a big
thrill.
KAREN TUMULTY: I ran into a pit
boss in Las
Vegas.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: We have all got
stories like
this.
KAREN TUMULTY: I was over at a
presidential
debate. And as I walking through
the casino
-- but the pit boss goes, "Gwen
Ifill."
(LAUGHTER)
RICHARD BERKE: The thing about
Gwen, you talk
about a transition to
television. She was
resistant for months, if not
years, to go
from The New York Times to
television, because
she would always say: "I am a
journalist.
I am a journalist."
TV, forgive me, in her mind,
wasn't always
journalism. But she's the one
who carried
over the tradition of fine
reporting, and
not punditry. Don't ever call
her a pundit,
because she would shriek at
that. She wanted
to talk about the news. And the
people on
"Washington Week" would talk
about stories,
not...
KAREN TUMULTY: Because they were
actually
covering them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
RICHARD BERKE: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yamiche -- go
ahead.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yamiche
Alcindor, I want
to bring you into the
conversation.
How did you meet her? How did
she mentor you?
YAMICHE ALCINDOR, The New York
Times: I met
Gwen Ifill under a hair drier.
(LAUGHTER)
YAMICHE ALCINDOR: We had the
same hairdresser.
And I was telling my hairdresser
so much stuff
about wanting to be a
journalist. And she
said, "You should really meet
Gwen Ifill and
her -- and one of her really
good friends,
Adalia (ph)."
And I basically endeared myself
to both her
and her friend Adalia (ph). And
from that
moment -- I was about 19 when I
met her -- she
mentored me and her friends
mentored me. And
they really welcomed me into
what I learned
later was really like a circle
of black women
who were in news and were living
in D.C. at
the time, because I went to
Georgetown.
And to come full circle, she
spoke at my graduation.
And that was the first time that
I remember
thinking, like, wow, I could
really do this
journalism thing. It was 2009. I
didn't know
if I was going to be able to
have a job. And
to be able to see her, to be
able to steadied
by her voice as I was walking
across the stage
really meant something.
And one of the first memories I
remember of,
like, us actually talking, I
told her: "Hi,
my name is Yamiche, but you can
call me Niche
if you want to."
And she said, "Well, do you like
being called
Niche? Like, what do you want to
be called?"
(LAUGHTER)
YAMICHE ALCINDOR: "Don't let
people give you
nicknames."
And it really stuck with me,
because she was
telling me then -- and I think
something that
holds true now -- like, be who
you are. Be
very steady in what you believe
and be an
honest journalist. Know your
name. Know what
you want people to call you and
really believe
in that.
And for my entire career, which
hasn't been
that long, she has really been
someone who
is not just -- not just someone
I could admire,
but someone who would watch my
"Meet the Press"
interviews.
I remember the first time I was
going to be
on "Meet the Press." I called
her, somewhat
frazzled, saying: "I'm going to
be doing the
show. Like, what do I do?"
And she was like: "You know what
you're doing.
You know the information."
And to have someone like that,
to have someone
of that caliber want to give
back to you,
and then to speak to me, I
thought, meant
a lot to me, because it showed
me that not
only was she someone that I
wanted to imitate,
but she was also someone that
taught me to
also bring other journalists
that are younger
than me up.
And that is something that, even
in my busiest
days, I try to remember that she
took the
time out to talk to me, so I
need to take
the time out to talk to other
people.
So, I am just devastated by
hearing of her
loss, because I know that I'm
not just -- we're
not just losing a journalist,
but we're losing
someone who has really believed
in mentoring
journalists coming behind her.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pastor Lamar, you
talked about
Gwen mentoring younger women at
the church.
What was it about her? How did
those connections
work?
REV. WILLIAM LAMAR IV: Well, I
think it's
important to say, Judy, that
Gwen comes from
a long line of women who had
great dignity
and great grace in the midst of
turmoil and
tumultuous situations that would
shrink the
average human being.
So, she comes from Barbados, the
West Indies,
and there's a great tradition of
excellence,
a great tradition of making sure
that you
make your presence known and
your gifts are
used.
And so, coming from Barbados,
being a part
of the African Methodist
Episcopal Church,
which has always been an
incubator of excellence
for persons of African descent,
and what I
appreciated about Gwen is, as
she rose in
stature and prominence, she
didn't abandon
the institutions that had shaped
and created
her.
So, she strengthened the church
by her presence
and by her participation, when
she was able,
taking the battleground when
necessary, offering
financial gifts, offering
mentorship, always
a smile.
And I just think she was
incredibly graceful,
incredibly stern, and just a joy
to be around.
We talked about books. We talked
about food.
We talked about travel. And she
could expose
all that she had done and the
persons that
she knew in a way that wasn't
off-putting.
JUDY WOODRUFF: She often talked
about being
a P.K., preacher's kid.
REV. WILLIAM LAMAR IV: Oh, yes.
And I was teasing that many
preachers' kids
do not turn out to be the most
well-adjusted...
(LAUGHTER)
(CROSSTALK)
REV. WILLIAM LAMAR IV: And many
of them abandon
the church, because it can be a
very painful
existence for children.
And Gwen's love of the church
and her faith
wasn't something that was
cordoned off in
a personal kind of piety kind of
situation,
but it moved her into the world
to make the
world a better place, a more
truthful place.
And what I am amazed about is
the number of
deep personal relationships that
she was able
to maintain. The persons who
have been gathering
today as she was with us for her
last moments,
she touched them in deep, deep
ways. And I
felt that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Rick Berke,
one of the things
that she said about being a
preacher's kid
is that it actually put her into
different
situations over and over again,
as she had
to move, which is traumatic for
a young person.
But she figured out a way to get
comfortable
in these situations.
RICHARD BERKE: She knew how to
make people
comfortable and just to talk
truth to people.
But I think one of the things I
have learned
about Gwen through the last year
is -- that's
so inspirational to all of us --
and, Judy,
you have seen it close up -- is
her resilience
in dealing with health issues,
but never shrinking
for one second from doing the
debates and
the convention coverage.
And the toughness and the drive
and the energy
it takes to do her job was
nothing short of
inspirational.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Only about a
minute left, but
Pete and Karen, she -- and we
heard Amy Walter
say this in the last panel --
she -- Gwen
really wanted to be a part of
covering this
election. And she fought hard.
It wasn't meant to be. She
wasn't there at
the end. But she hung in as long
as she could.
PETE WILLIAMS: And how much we
would have
-- how much we would have
benefited from her
analysis.
The thing that strikes me is,
you know, a
lot of people in Washington, as
they become
successful, they shed their old
friends and
move into upper circles.
Not Gwen. She added to them and
just kept
adding to them. And I would pick
up on your
point there about that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we are just
incredibly
grateful to all of you, to all
of you for
being here with us on this day
that we never
wanted to have arrive.
Yamiche Alcindor, thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Pete Williams,
thanks to you.
Karen Tumulty, Rick Berke, and
Pastor Lamar,
thank you all.
REV. WILLIAM LAMAR IV: Thank
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we know that
Gwen would
have wanted us to report the
other news of
this very full day, too. And
that's what we
are going to do next.
But we will be back at the end
of the program
with a conversation Gwen had
with her dear
friend, former NPR host Michele
Norris.
To that other news now.
President-elect Donald Trump ran
into growing
criticism today of one of his
first transition
appointments. On Sunday, he
named conservative
media executive Steve Bannon as
his chief
strategist. Bannon's been
accused of racist
and anti-Semitic sentiments, and
Democrats
condemned the choice, while the
Trump team
defended it.
REP. BETTY MCCOLLUM (D),
Minnesota: The fact
that Republicans have been
silent on Bannon's
appointment is a disturbing
sign.
It shows that the Republican
Party has embraced
Trump's campaign agenda blatant
sexism, racial
bigotry and of religious
intolerance.
KELLYANNE CONWAY, Trump Campaign
Manager:
I'm personally offended that you
would think
I would manage a campaign where
that would
be one of the going
philosophies. It was not.
And, as you know,
66-million-plus Americans
or so saw something else.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also today, the
president-elect
spoke by phone with Russian
President Vladimir
Putin, and told him he looks for
a strong
and enduring relationship with
Moscow.
Meanwhile, protests continued
against his
election. In East Los Angeles
today, students
left class and marched toward
City Hall to
demonstrate.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The election
and transition
dominated President Obama's
White House news
conference today. It lasted well
over an hour,
and came before he left on his
final overseas
trip as president.
The president said both
Americans and world
leaders need to give his
successor time to
show what he means to do.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
In my conversation with the
president-elect,
he expressed a great interest in
maintaining
our core strategic
relationships.
And so one of the messages I
will be able
to deliver is his commitment to
NATO and the
Transatlantic Alliance. I think
that's one
of the most important functions
I can serve
at this stage during this trip
is to let them
know that there is no weakening
of resolve
when it comes to America's
commitment to maintaining
a strong and robust NATO
relationship and
a recognition that those
alliances aren't
just good for Europe. They are
good for the
United States, and they are
vital for the
world.
I have been encouraged by his
statements on
election night about the need
for unity and
his interest in being the
president for all
people. And that how he staffs,
the first
steps he takes, the first
impressions he makes,
the reset that can happen after
an election,
all those things are important
and should
be thought about.
And I think it's important to
give him the
room and the space to do that.
It takes time
to put that together.
It would not be appropriate for
me to comment
on every appointment that the
president-elect
starts making, if I want to be
consistent
with the notion that we are
going to try to
facilitate a smooth transition.
But the people have spoken.
Donald Trump will
be the next president, the 45th
President
of the United States. And it
will be up to
him to set up a team that he
thinks will serve
him well and reflect his
policies. And those
who didn't vote for him have to
recognize
that that's how democracy works.
Regardless of what experience or
assumptions
he brought to the office, this
office has
a way of waking you up. And
those -- those
aspects of his positions or
predispositions
a way of waking you up. And
those -- those
aspects of his positions or
predispositions
that don't match up with
reality, he will
find shaken up pretty quick,
because reality
has a way of asserting itself.
QUESTION: Mr. President, you had
talked specifically
about his temperament. Do you
still have any
concern about his temperament?
BARACK OBAMA: There are going to
be certain
elements of his temperament that
will not
serve him well, unless he
recognizes them
and corrects them, because when
you're a candidate
and you say something that is
inaccurate or
controversial, it has less
impact than it
does when you're president of
the United States.
Everybody around the world's
paying attention.
Markets move.
On the deferred action program
that we have,
known as DACA, that relates to
dreamers who
are currently benefiting from
these provisions,
I will urge the president-elect
and the incoming
administration to think long and
hard before
they are endangering the status
of what, for
all practical purposes, are
American kids.
So, we will try to share the
lessons that
we have learned over these last
eight years
with the incoming president. And
my hope is,
he makes things better. And, if
he does, we
will all benefit from it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: The
contest for chair of the
Democratic National
Committee heated up.
Representative Keith
Ellison of Minnesota, the first
Muslim elected
to Congress, announced he's
running.
Former Vermont Governor Howard
Dean is also
in the race, and several others
may join.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Congress
returned to work
today for the first time since
the election,
chief on the agenda, keeping the
government
open past December 9, when
current funding
expires.
Republicans are expected to push
a short-term
bill, delaying a comprehensive
measure until
president-elect Trump is
inaugurated.
In New Zealand, the military
worked today
to rescue some 1,200 people from
a town hit
hard by an earthquake on Sunday.
It registered
magnitude-7.8 and left tourists
and locals
stranded in Kaikoura on the
coast. Highways
into the town were destroyed by
landslides
and homes were leveled. The
government sent
ships and helicopters to rescue
those who
are stranded.
JOHN KEY, Prime Minister of New
Zealand: The
only way through is flying
people in and out.
There's quite a number of
tourists now who
also could be stuck with
international connections.
So we will have to think about
that.
There's also the longevity of
the businesses
here, that, short term, aren't
getting a lot
of customers, because, again,
you know, because
there's no access point in and
out.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The quake
killed two people,
and the prime minister estimated
damage in
the billions of dollars.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In economic news,
the chair
of the Securities and Exchange
Commission,
Mary Jo White, says that she
will step down
in the coming weeks. She's been
in the position
nearly four years.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial
average gained 21 points to
close at 18868.
The Nasdaq fell 18 points, and
the S&P 500
slipped a quarter-of-a-point.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And the
brightest moon in
almost 70 years lit up the sky
overnight.
The so-called supermoon appeared
much bigger
and brighter than usual, as its
orbit brought
it within 221,000 miles of
Earth. That's the
closest since 1948. It won't
happen again
for another 18 years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally, a
final word
from our unforgettable Gwen
Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally, a
final word
from our unforgettable Gwen
Ifill.
Gwen was interviewed by her
close friend and
fellow journalist Michele Norris
for an episode
of the PBS series "The
HistoryMakers" which
first aired in January 2015.
We close tonight with Gwen's own
thoughts
about political history,
journalism, and her
own role.
MICHELE NORRIS, NPR: When you
went to television...
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
MICHELE NORRIS: ... we heart
from Pete Williams
that you took to it almost
immediately.
GWEN IFILL: That's so not true.
I was -- I love Pete. And it's
so sweet that
he thought at. But it was really
hard making
-- and you know this -- making
the transition
from print to television.
You had to figure out how to
write differently.
You had to figure out how
present differently.
And you had to settle on the
right shade of
lipstick, which was huge.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: It turned out that
everybody had
something to say about you when
you're in
front of a television.
But the other thing is, you get
your phone
calls returned. People felt they
knew you.
That accessibility quotient came
to work.
And you reached a much broader
audience.
So, when I left The Times, I
remember going
to the then publisher, Arthur
Sulzberger,
at The Times and told him I was
thinking of
leaving to go to work for NBC.
And he said: "Why would you go
to work in
television? I don't watch
television."
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Well, that's
changed.
But the point was, I wanted to
make sure,
another important lesson for the
children,
which is, I didn't burn bridges.
I made sure,
in case I failed in television,
I could go
back to print.
And I didn't fail for the same
reasons why
you don't fail. You work hard.
It's not how
you get in the door. It's what
you do once
you are through the door. And
you make sure
that you make friends and learn
lessons from
the people who are willing to
help and ignore
the haters.
MICHELE NORRIS: But, you know,
and one thing
that I can say, having worked in
television
also, is that everywhere I would
go, I would
find camera crews who loved them
some Gwen
Ifill, that you remembered that
it was a team
that got you on the air.
GWEN IFILL: Well, I would flirt
with the camera
crews, too, I should say, to
this day.
(LAUGHTER)
MICHELE NORRIS: You covered a
lot of conventions.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
MICHELE NORRIS: And you have
said that covering
the conventions is actually one
of your favorite
parts of covering politics.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
MICHELE NORRIS: What do you love
so much about
conventions?
GWEN IFILL: I'm one of the last
holdouts who
think conventions kind of
matter.
I like a room full of people who
are enthusiastic
about the process. I like -- I
think it's
important that we hear from the
future leaders
of our party.
I was standing on the podium --
the podium
-- the dais in 2004 when the
keynote speaker
finished speaking. And when
Barack Obama walked
over to me with the -- you know,
place was
crazy, and the confetti was
flying and balloons.
MICHELE NORRIS: The balloons and
all that.
GWEN IFILL: And there was this
electricity,
you will remember, that night.
And I asked him how he thought
he did. And
he says, "Ah, I think I did OK."
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Now, I found out
later that Michelle
had said to him in advance,
"Just don't screw
up."
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: So, you know what?
He didn't.
And it was great to be there in
that moment
at that time, and to talk to him
about it,
and to capture that sparkle that
came off
him as he was bursting on to the
scene.
MICHELE NORRIS: Your brother has
said that
you, as a kid, used to watch
conventions.
GWEN IFILL: Yes, don't believe
everything
my brother says, but that's
right.
MICHELE NORRIS: You did? You
did?
GWEN IFILL: We watched
conventions kind of
for recreation.
Once again, this was an
extension of the fact
that my parents thought that
what happened
in American politics and
government mattered.
So -- and, also, keep in mind
that, when we
were growing up and watching
conventions,
we didn't know how they were
going to end.
They were actually kind of
dramatic.
And imagine watching a
convention when Barbara
Jordan gets up and speaks, and
you're a little
black girl at home who sees
nothing like this
on television. It blows your
mind. Where else
was I going to see that voice,
hear that voice?
And so, as a result, whenever I
go through
the Austin Airport, I stop and
pat her a little
bit. There's a wonderful bronze
sculpture
of her in baggage claim at the
Austin Airport.
And I just greet her every time,
because she
was amazing.
And Shirley Chisholm -- I mean,
there were
women, black women who were out
there speaking
their truth in an environment
where it wasn't
generally welcomed.
MICHELE NORRIS: As I listen to
you talk about
this, though, I'm imagining
children watching
television now and seeing you.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: She's going to make
me a little
verklempt here.
You know, when I was a little
girl, there
was a woman named Melba Tolliver
who was on
the news. And she had a big
afro. And I just
was transfixed by this idea, not
-- it didn't
make me want to be in
television, as much
as it made me want to tell the
story.
And every now and then, I'm not
particularly
interested in -- you know, I
just get caught
up in whatever the day's work
is. And, invariably,
somebody will come up to me and
tell me the
story of their little girl.
And it always stops me in my
tracks, because,
as long as I remember that there
is someone
on the other side of the piece
of equipment,
the camera, who is watching me
with expectation,
and it can shape what they do
next, I just
take what I do seriously every
single day.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
To my friend and mentor, thank
you, Gwen.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," Gwen,
we love you. We will miss you.
And we know all of you in our
audience will,
too.
And we know all of you in our
audience will,
too.